# DATA340NLP-SemesterProject

**Beyond The Beat: Leveraging Lyric Content and Sentiment to Classify Songs Into Genres**

**Abstract:** Music recommendation systems utilize audio features to recommend songs for users, but neglect the lyrical features of songs such as lyric content, structure, and sentiment. Natural Language Processing (NLP) techniques can give insight into whether song lyrical information can be used to categorize songs into genres to enable better music recommendation systems. Previous literature reveals gaps in multi-class genre classification that utilize non-bag-of-words datasets, machine learning architectures that preserve lyric structure, and combining lyric sentiment analysis with lyric word content. Three ideas were tested regarding their ability to classify songs into different genres: song lyric content in an intact song structure format, song sentiment at the song versus lyric level, and combining the content and sentiment performance in an ensemble manner. Using a dataset of ten musical genres and comparing Logistic Regression (LR), Bi-Directional Long Short Term Memory (Bi-LSTM), and Hierarchical Attention Network (HAN) machine learning techniques on lyric content found the HAN model outperforms other methods. Comparing lyric sentiment at the song level and lyric level saw a nearly two-fold increase in accuracy for lyric-level models. Combining the LR and Bi-LSTM content models with song-level and lyric-level sentiment models, Decision Tree Classifier and Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) respectively, decreased overall ensemble performance. The highest performing ensemble was the HAN content with lyric-level RNN, with an accuracy of 43.07%. Matching the data structure with a model that attends to the nuances of a data form, such as the attention levels of the HAN paired with structural song breakdown, can increase performance and ability to solve song genre classification and other NLP tasks. Future work can fine-tune the ensemble models for higher accuracy. 

**Full Paper and Code Documentation Available In this Repo. Please refer to the ReadMe's in each folder for more information regarding specific files.**

